This is your last chance.
After this there is no turning back.
If you take the blue pill.
The story ends.
You wake up in your bed and
believe whatever you want.
You take the red pill,
you stay in Wonderland.
And I show you how deep
the rabbit hole goes.
Remember. All I'm offering
is the truth, nothing.
Yeah, and then, uh, so let's ask
this question how many of you
are happy to take the red pill?
So I already started the recording.
Thank you for reminding me so Mason
was happy. So how about others?
So Arnish is happy.
Do you know why says that blue pill please?
So, uh, basically for those
who took the I mean a red pill,
whether they are they regret or no.
Then we started this course.
We started from the very beginning.
From the earth.
And then we tried to go into the, uh.
Uh. Deep into the operating system.
And how the operating system is
helping us to write efficient
programs and use the different
parts of the computer system.
So that was the rabbit
hole that we went together.
We started with the problems and
we said that there is a small
part of the problems can be solved
by computers and if we want to
solve those problems with the
computers we have to write programs.
So any program has two parts, algorithms,
some steps to take and data part,
the information that we have to analyze,
and then finally we have to represent
the solution in numbers or in
data and all these programs going
to be run on a machine.
And then, uh, we said.
I mean, we said that, uh,
in the history there were.
I mean, very naive machines.
And then gradually we built and
we built a more sophisticated
and more advanced machines.
And basically for these
machines there were some up.
Persons that manually loads the programs
into the machine and make the machine run.
And based on these three main
uh entities in computer science,
the algorithm, the data,
and the machine,
all the courses or all the research topics
can be categorized into three dimensions.
Those that discuss about how to deal
with the data and how to represent data,
those with discuss how to write an algorithm,
how to come up with an algorithm
that solves the problem and etc.
Algorithm is fast or slow.
These are the courses that you are
going to take in the computer science
and the third dimension is about
how to build a machine that runs
the algorithm and stores the data.
In the third dimension, we said that.
One of the very first, uh.
Topic that we have to know is
operating system.
Basically, uh, the idea of operating
system is to run on top of a machine.
The machine that runs the programs
or was proposed the the first model
of the machines that run the program
is proposed by John von Neumann.
He was a polymath electrician, mathematician,
and computer scientist he proposed.
This structure. Basically,
he says that any program should reside in
the memory to execute it to be executed,
and all the instruction going to be
fetched by the processor executed and the
result going to be back to the memory.
And this communication happens with the bus.
However, dealing with the details
of a machine is very hard.
I mean it's very complex,
so these two guys,
Dennis Ritchie and Kenneth Thompson and they
decided to write a program that deals
with the details of the hardware,
the computer system bootstrapping a
program inside the memory and etc in a way
that the application level programs do not.
I mean don't have to deal with
the details of the hardware.
So basically they make the task for
the application level program much
more easier by writing a program
which is called operating system.
So basically they write a program for
other programs or we call this type
of program system level programs.
And basically this program.
Makes an abstract layer over
the machine or computer,
and our program is dealing or communicating
with the operating system to use
the different part of the computer.
For instance, if you want to write
out some message to the monitor.
Uh, if you don't have the operating
system you have to deal directly
with the hardware of the monitor,
how to render the pixels,
how what pixel of the mother got,
gotta be enabled and etc.
Or if you want to ask a user
to put some input,
your program should directly deal
with the keyboard and in order
to get the ASCII code and etc.
So this way the programmers is
has a very sophisticated task,
but having the operating system
it's very easy for our program
to deal with the hardware.
Just using the system calls
provided by this operating system,
we can simply print out to the monitor or
scan from the keyboard and other devices.
Then, uh, we started to know the
services or the system calls that the
operating system provides for us as the
programmers to deal with the computers.
There were five main components
of the operating system.
We started to introduce three
main part and we leave the other
two parts for other courses.
In the first part we introduced the File
Manager or widely known as file system.
So basically in this part or we
said that any device to operating
system Unix operating system is.
And it's string or a string of bytes.
Whether it's in a storage,
whether it's a keyboard,
whether it's a monitor or etc,
and that is as a result,
they are all treated as a file,
whether it's a device or whether it's
the actual filing, a storage device,
or the same in terms mean in this.
Part of the kernel.
Then we introduce two main header file
that includes the system calls for us.
With the create or sorry,
we don't have the "e" here.
the create or open.
We can create a new device or
file and these are the options.
Main options that we can pass the
open in order to create a file or
happen to the existing file and etc.
And also after creating or opening
a file or a device we can read
from that device or file or we
can write to a device or to a
file or we said that any device.
Uhm?
Has a offset which basically says
that what is the current position at
which we are reading or writing to.
And that's why we introduced this
movie The movie a few good men.
Basically that was a kind of hint for
you that any file has a Sentinel or
God that basically keep track of the
correct position at which we are reading.
Or we are writing to.
And we said that by this system
called we can move a the correct
position forward or backward.
Otherwise the current offset or the
correct position automatically move
forward with the read or write.
And then after we are dealing
with the content of the file,
we can close the handle to that file
that we are writing or reading at.
That handle is called file descriptor.
We set that file descriptors,
uh,
I mean,
this matrix movie The idea of the
phone connection.
He said that the file descriptor is a number,
but the number doesn't matter.
The connection matters,
so it's very similar to hear if
the phone number doesn't matter,
as long as we have a connection we
can deal with that file and this
file descriptor is a connection.
And we said that there are some
standard file descriptor numbers
012 that are four standard input,
output and error.
And then after that we introduced the
idea of duplicating a file descriptor.
And they explained what is the
difference between duplicating the
file descriptor and opening a file?
Because the return type of
a file is a file
descriptor. The main application of
the duplicating a file descriptor
was about IO redirection.
It is very important and what's the
benefit of duplicating a file descriptor
and we explained what's the benefit,
and this is the application
that I ordered direction.
And then after dealing with
writing or reading from a file
with the file descriptors or
writing or reading from a terminal,
we already had a lab that deals
with reading or writing from the
terminal TTY if you remember.
After that we discussed about dealing with
this specific device storage devices.
Before that, any device, keyboard,
monitor, mouse, etc are like a file, but
it specifically about this threat devices.
We explain how the files are
stored in a storage device in Unix
platform by the idea of the i-Nodes.
Basically, it's a linked list array of
pointers to data blocks and data blocks are
the actual binary information of the files.
And then these are the different
ways of the categorization or
splitting the whole data set.
That whole stretch file.
Storage device. So I-Nodes.
Uh, if you remember we have an.
I-Node that all has a pointers.
Each pointers is at address of the
data blocks and the collection of each
data blocks considers as a group and
then the collections of the groups
considers as a partition and collection
of partitions or the holster device.
We said that at the moment of
the partition you are allowed to
determine the size of the data
blocks and the number of groups and
we explained what's the difference.
Then, uh, we explain directories
as a special type of files,
which basically they are
just pointers to i-Nodes.
Uh,
we have access to directories to see
what are the pointers to what files,
but we don't have direct access
to the I-Nodes.
And we said that based on
the idea of directories,
what happens when we delete the file,
move a file or copy a file from
one location to another location?
And we explained the idea of fragmentation,
which basically means that if you
are storing data which is less than
the size of a data- uh a data block.
You are going to waste some amount
of a space within the data blocks,
which is called fragmentation.
And it matters when you determine
the size of the data blocks and what
type of data you are going to store.
So we already explained what's
the difference if you.
A select a large number for data blocks
or small number for the data blocks.
And depends on the type of
data you want to store.
Whether you are going to store a.
Movies or you are going
to store just documents?
And then we move toward the
another component of the kernel,
a process manager or process control.
The main duty or the main service
provided by this part of the kernel is
about running a program as a process.
So basically it deals with how to
bootstrap a program inside the memory.
Sorry.
So each program has the entry point main.
We discussed different versions of the
main function with input without input,
and if you remember the arg.
C and ARGV and the return is in
the full version of the main.
And then when the, uh, Colonel bootstraps
your program inside the memory,
what is the memory layout of your process?
And what are the different segments,
code segments, data segment,
BSS segment and Stack segment?
Also, we explained what is
the benefit of having a stack.
And he passed space.
And what's the benefit of having a
heap space? And having the, uh, uh,
opportunity to have memory in dying,
I mean in runtime you can dynamically
request some amount of memory from kernel.
We said that any program,
when it bootstraps the memory,
it becomes a process and gets
a PID or process ID.
So at any time any process can
print out the PID of itself.
And when your process is done,
there is no opt to run a.
It terminates when it 10 minutes.
You can say that whether the
exit is normal or abnormal.
And if it is normal,
you can exit any status,
meaning that whether the status is zero,
meaning that everything is OK
or non zero in order to.
Tell that this program finishes normally.
However, there are some exception
happened in running the program,
so you can exit non zero status in order
to say that although the exit was normal,
but there were some error
happened in running the program.
Abnormal exit was when your program
is executed and sometimes the
kernel or other process kills
your program by sending a signal.
And then when we discuss how a
simple or a single process is
executing inside the memory,
we said that it is possible to have.
Multiple processes inside a memory.
We explain why it's beneficial to have
multiple processes inside the memory.
In this way we have a single processor,
but we can share that single processor
with between multiple processes.
One of the immediate, uh,
answer is that if it process A is waiting
for a user to enter some numbers,
another process P can have the
processor and do some other tasks.
So while A is waiting. For user.
If you can run other tasks.
In order to create a new processes,
we said that any process can call
this system called fork by this.
The color becomes the parent and
the new process becomes the child.
And then we discussed Orphan Child,
Zombie Child and we said that in
order for the parent to take the
responsibility of the child, the parent,
it's a good policy that the patent awaits.
For its child up until they finish
and then it finishes,
finishes himself or herself.
So basically, if the parent.
Uh finishes sooner.
Before the child finish,
then we have an orphan child, meaning
that the child doesn't have any parent.
That parent ended already.
And, uh, in this case,
the kernel adopted child process,
we have a zombie,
a child,
which basically means that the
child finishes,
but it's waiting for the parent
to call the weight or to finish.
So in this case,
which is dangerous if it takes a lot of time.
If the parent forgets to finish
or forgets to call the wait,
we have a child which already done the task.
But it is inside the memory
waiting for the parent,
and the kernel cannot adopt this
child because the this child
has already had a parent, so.
That's not good.
And then we discussed different
ways of generating a child or
giving birth to a new process.
Uh,
in order to avoid having
orphan child or zombie child.
And then we said we can have a grandchild.
Or you can have multiple
children in one of the labs.
It was in Lab 8 I think.
Which lab you had to other lab 8 or lab 9?
You you create a one child per row of
a matrix or per column of the matrix.
I think it was last night. Uh, yeah.
And then we discuss another.
System called exact.
Uh, and we discuss what's difference between
forking and exact exact doesn't produce
a new process when you when a process A.
Kohl's exact for another process P
what happens is that the A gonna be
invaded by the lines of code 4 from B.
So basically be.
Devours or invade the memory space of a.
So there is no new process.
The space of the A gonna be emptied and
it is replaced by the code lines of P.
And then we discuss in a multi
processing environment,
what are the lifecycle of is single.
Program the program becomes a process,
goes in the radio state,
and then if they cannot give
their CPU or processor to that.
Process it becomes a runnable process.
It runs the opcodes and then at
some point the process may wait for
user to input some numbers so the
process goes the blocking state up
until it receives some input from
the user and after that if the.
That is ready.
It goes against the radius state.
And then waiting for the kernel in order
to provide the processor to the process.
And after these circulation,
finally the process is going to be
terminated either normally or abnormally.
Another part of the process manager
is dealing about process communication
and we have multiple processes or we
are able to provide a communication.
One of the easy communication
is from the pattern to.
The child is basically everything
going to be carried by the parent
and the parent calls the fork.
So a copy of the pattern goes to the child.
This is a very easy and naive
way of communication between
parent to the child is one way.
But we need a two way communication.
We introduce signaling as a very harsh
or very warning way of communication.
Basically, this communication is
just to give a warning to processes.
Uh, the kernel provides a system called kill.
It doesn't mean that you want
to kill the process.
Basically, it depends on the signal
that you passed this system called.
If a calls. Kill.
So another process P with a system called,
for instance, sick.
Usr.
This is one of the signals
that we introduced.
Then we have to see what is the default
action of these signal and whether
the receiver be handles that or not.
So we discussed the signal handling and
sometimes the signal handler just simply
ignores the signal at the receiver.
Or it leaves as a default action.
If the default action is termination,
basically they be gonna be killed.
If the signal is handled by the
receiver and it is ignored,
then nothing happens to the.
A receiver to be so again kills
this system called doesn't mean
that you are going to kill.
The, uh,
the another process.
But we were trying to find a better way of
communication and normal communication.
Two way communication.
We said that either we can share a file
as a shared space for two processes.
Uh, we say that there are some problem
with this way and easy way is that again,
the kernel provides. Pipe.
As an unnamed file or FIFA as a name file.
In order to handle with extreme situations
such as what happens when there is a no
sender but there is a receiver or etc.
What happens when the content of the
file is empty or it is full and etc.
Everything going to be handled by the
kernel when you are using pipe or FIFA?
And we said that when you are using a pipe.
Or fearful you need to synchronize
the communication. Who wants to talk?
Who wants to listen? So.
The process that talks or generate
the data becomes a producer.
The processor that listens or analyze or
received it either becomes the consumer.
So we said that at any point,
whether it's a parent or child can
decide whether they wanted to be a
producer or they're gonna be a consumer.
So in this paradigm.
Uh, it doesn't matter whether it
is a parent or child.
Both of them can act as a
producer or can act as a consumer.
The main problem is that.
At anytime.
In this course a process should
be either a producer or consumer.
In this course we said that the process
cannot be both of them at the same time.
Whether this or this is kind of exclusive or
we cannot have both of them for the process.
In this course.
And then after knowing the
communication between the process,
we move toward another part of the kernel
network manager in order to provide
communication or IPC between the processes.
In different computers.
By using the network. As a result,
we introduced the network protocol.
This is another course we can
take this course and to know more
about the network protocols,
but for our task we introduced one of
the most common protocols, TCP IP.
We introduced two ways of communication,
UDP, an TCP.
UDP is very similar to just shooting
a message or mail to the receiver.
So we introduced the pattern
of sender and receiver.
A at the sender you open a socket.
It's optional to bind your address
and then you send your message.
At the receiver you open a socket.
It is mandatory to have it binding
address because you should make
your address public in order to
help the sender to send the mail,
and then you receive from the sender.
For the UDP,
for the TCP type of communication
is very close to the phone call.
In the server you have to open a socket,
bind your address,
start listening to the calls
and then if somebody calls you,
you have to accept the call and then
receive the message and reply to the message.
The clients who wants to do the
call if they open the socket,
it is optional for them to
bind their address,
or they can leave these to the kernel
and then they dial the number or dial
the others by the system called connect
and when the connection is happening,
the client can send information and
received a reply from this server.
So this platform with this pattern
is called client server architecture.
And,
uh.
Uh, sorry, this part should
be removed. This is an error.
And then knowing, uh, these services
from different parts of the kernel,
we said that now that we know these
service calls, a system calls a.
But we can write a programs using mixture
of these system calls to provide an
efficient and pretty program. Bikol,
we introduced the idea of design patterns.
And as an example,
we introduce a daemon process which
basically we want to have a process.
It stays in the background.
And it stays in the memory forever.
And do some active or passive jobs for us.
We put an example for this server.
We tried to make it a as a daemon process.
The process of making a process as a demon.
It's called demonising, a process.
We use this pattern to demonize our server.
By using I mean replacing all the printf.
By writing a lot file and
creating a orphan child.
There are different ways of demonising,
but that was one way to demonize a process.
Today I'm going to introduce
another interesting design pattern.
Shared library.
Which basically is trying to
demonize the library or a header.
I mean a collection of library routines
as a demon inside the process and then.
I will quickly introduce the
idea of web service.
What was that?
OK, so. Before I start the new topic,
uh, I just wanted to ask you that.
After all these, knowing these system
calls now, do you feel like it's comboy?
Who is able to bend this spoon in the world?
Do you feel like this person or no?
So basically what I can tell
is that based on the I mean,
the system calls and the labs
that you if you did the labs.
Uh, I can put you above the uh,
normal. Uh. Programmers.
Based on my experience,
most of the programmers that
I had a chance to deal with.
A 50% of them doesn't know
what this system called.
And doesn't know how can how they
can create a new process on what
happens when you create a new process.
And, uh, what is a multi
processing environment and etc so?
I hope you have this feeling
of kind of having advanced
knowledge of programming.
So.
Now I'm going to just quickly introduce
a new pattern about library routines.
And, uh, I hope. By this last
topic we can conclude our course.
So before I start any question.
I think I'm going to mute
your mic if you don't mind.
OK, we have a question here by bahagia.
Final exam would have only questions
similar to lecture assignments or there
will be any programming questions.
Honestly, I answered this question
multiple times in the lectures
and also in the discussion board.
If you go to the uh discussion at
the forum about the final exam.
Other students are asked the same questions.
Basically, in the exam a,
there will be no programming questions,
meaning that I won't ask you
to write a program.
However.
There will be some piece of code
as a question as a part of the
question and you will be asked to
find the problem with the code.
So you don't have to, uh, I mean,
memorize the header files or memorize the.
System calls.
The names of the system calls,
so I won't ask you to write a code.
However, as I said, for instance,
I give you a piece of code and
I'm saying that.
What is the problem with this code and
what happens when you run this code?
So because it's a open book,
take home exam,
you can simply write the code inside your
computer and run it and see what happens.
But sometimes it's not that easy,
but again, you are not.
I mean you are not asked to write a code.
Yeah,
it's just very similar.
Yes,
it is very similar to
the lecture assignments.
Uh, yes. As I said, I mean, uh,
any topic before the midterm
will not be in the exam,
so we just have direct question
about the topics after the
exam after the meeting.
So these three main parts,
file system process manager
and the network IPC. Yeah.
Any other questions?
OK, basic Daniel says that
I can ban these spoons.
I cannot ban this post, but I feel powerful.
Good, that's good so.
This last topic is about shared libraries.
So the idea is that.
Is it possible to have a library?
Shared between all the processes
inside the computer. Or even.
Between all the processes that are in
another computers or other computers,
so whether the processes inside the
computer or whether the process is.
Uh, outside the computer in another computer.
Is it possible to have a library
that is shared among them?
Uh, the topics of today
actually are used this URL?
It's a very clear, uh,
I mean blog about how to write a
library and how to share a library so.
Details or the examples are
all borrowed from this URL.
You can read more about this topic here.
If you remember before the midterm exam, we
discuss about something called static link.
Meaning that when you are writing a
program and you want to use some functions
that is written by another programmer
or it is delivered by an operating
system as a part of library routine.
What happens is that you are using
that library by static linking.
So we wanted this said that the static
linking means that at compile time
the linker links the object or opcode
of that function into your code.
When you include a header file or when you
use a function that is not written by you.
So as an example,
we already said that if you write a program
like this and you use the function print F.
From the header file STD IO.
You don't write the function printf.
Also, you haven't written the header file.
The only thing is that you are using
this function to print out a message.
What happens is that when
you compile your code,
it becomes an assembly.
You already said that and then.
You build your assembly into opcodes,
so this becomes the binary representation
or opcode of your program.
But what happens about who wrote
this function and what is the
opcode of this function?
Or what is the opcode of the
functions in this header file?
We said that at the linking phase,
the OP code of the printf,
so it's better to write it printf.
The opcode of printf function,
which is already written
by another programmer.
And it is delivered by the operating
system as a library routine is
already available as binary.
And when you link your.
OP code of your program with
the opcode of the header files
or the function that they used.
They merge together and because
one single executable file and
this becomes your main file that
you execute in the shell.
So whatever you did so far basically
was a static linking again.
Here I'm not talking about the system calls,
I'm talking about the library routines
that you use for your programs.
We already said that at the static linking.
Basically your program.
At the time of compile,
if this is the library that you are using.
It is already a copy of the
binary or the opcode of that
library is inside their program.
So your program already has
the OP code of the library,
and then you ask the shell to
run your program and do yours.
The shell as they cannot go describe
your program and your program
goes inside a memory and these
are the op code of the library or
the function that you are using.
Such as printf.
So from the front this type of
linking all you did in the lab so far,
we're basically all were static linking
and funny point of view of the kernel.
It doesn't matter that you are
aesthetic linking or other sorry,
it doesn't matter that that you are using a
library or you are not using the library.
What happens?
Just simply bootstrap your program.
So as you can see here,
from the kernel point of view.
This is just a program that
includes the opcodes of the library.
If you don't include the
library at compile time,
the full process is the same,
so they cannot book it.
Stop your program here.
So it doesn't matter for the kernel A
whether you are using a library or not.
Everything is the same.
So now I'm going to discuss how we can,
as a programmer, write a library
and deliver it as a static library,
and other programmers can use our
library and link to our library.
So basically I'm going to explain
how the programmer for the STD IO H.
Provides us with the a lot of
useful functions such as print app,
scan app and etc. So again, these are not.
System calls, we already said that
system calls or calling the kernel.
These are library routines.
So in terms of a static library,
this is the process.
I'm saying that you can have
your own standing library and
deliver it to other programmers.
What happens is this.
Imagine we are going to
write our own math library.
Basically, a math library
should do addition for for any,
I mean any math library
has an addition function.
So as a programmer we have to
write in addition function
basically to argument integer and
then plus and return the result.
So their return is integer
to integer gonna be added.
Again,
you can add another function subtraction,
2 numbers subtracted from each
other and return the result.
You can add another function
that multiplies 2 numbers.
You can add another function that is
like returns the square root of a number.
In X and then in the body
you calculate the square root
of a number and it sets up.
You can add.
Uh, thousands of math functions here.
For instance,
we can add a function that calculates the
roots of a quadratic equation and etc.
So basically and then you put
each function inside a file
with the extension C.
And then, with the help of C compiler,
you compile your A.
Fight so you have one file for addition.
You compile it and it becomes
the opcode for the addition.
So this is the object file of the edition.
Then you write another function subtraction,
put it inside a file with the extension,
see it, compile it, and then it becomes
an object file subtraction and etc.
You see here.
For any function that adds
a service or at a helping,
I mean function to.
For other programs you can
write that function.
You put it inside a C file and then
compile it and make it an object file.
And then. You put all these optic files.
Into an archive. Basically you zip
them or you make an archive of them.
Into a single file.
So this happens with the archive command and
this is the option for the archive command.
This is standard calling for the
archive with these two options or as,
so you can read about this in the
Internet so you can call the.
Manual for the AR.
And it explains what is this option.
Basically, you are telling us the archive
command that I want to put all these objects.
Files into a single file.
By convention the.
Extension is a meaning that archive.
And then you can pick a name for the
collection of functions that you wrote,
so here these are the collection
related to math functions.
We call it math library,
and the extension is archive.
So after running this command,
a one final file gonna
be generated called math.
Live dot archive.
So basically you build and
static library in math library.
That is a that can be used by any programmer.
That's that's simple.
That's it. So basically,
for each function you write a file,
you compile it into object file
and then you put them all together
into a zip file with the extension
a with the command of archive.
And then you put it in your website
or you asked Unix or a bunch O
or whatever at delivery of the
version of the Unix to add your
library to their distribution.
When it goes to the distribution,
I buy your library or I download
your library and I want to use the
function that you wrote for me.
So how can I use the static library?
Basically in my program.
I have to just simply first use the prototype
or the definition of your functions,
not the body because I don't have the body.
I have the archive of the object files,
but they have to know what are
the definition of the functions.
So I have to include the definition
of the functions and then I use them.
If I don't include the
definition and I use them,
the compiler raised an error and
says that I don't know what it's at.
But when you include the
definition of the function,
the compiler knows that this
is already defined somewhere.
At least it doesn't raise an error
at that time at the compile time.
So you have to include the
definition or the prototypes of all
the functions that you are going
to use from that static library.
And then you simply call the function.
A better way is this.
Again, this is another way of design.
A better way is that.
What if I don't know what are the
functions in this static library?
Whether I have to ask the
programmer of the library,
what are the functions or the producer
of the library already put all the
prototypes of the functions in
that library into a separate file?
Which is which we call it library
header file. And the extension is dot H.
So basically this file includes all
the prototypes or the definition
of the functions in a single file.
And it's going to be provided by
the producer of the static library.
And then.
I can simply use the name of the header file.
Instead of just including the
definition of all the functions
that I'm going to use in my program.
And I use the quotation because
this is in the current folder of
my program this file.
If it is in the standard location
of the Unix operating system,
you can use the these elements.
Greater or lower,
but if it is in the correct directly,
you can use quotation.
Because I'm the producer of the
static library,
I put it in the current folder
of my computer so I have a.
If this is my current directory,
I already have the math.
Live dot archive and also I already have
the math Lib dot age in the current folder.
Now I'm going to write the main.
File these are in the same folder,
so that's why I use the quotation.
Now I can.
Compile my program.
And then at the linking time when
I want to create the executable file.
As a main.
I can say that this is the object
of opcode of my program and the
opcode of the functions that I'm
using is inside this archive.
And when you build your program,
the compiler, the C compiler tries to find
the opcode of the ad from this archive.
The OP code of this sub from this archive.
And then merge them with the
upload of my main program and
produce a single file as me.
And then, uh, basically I use
the addition returns the result.
I use the subtraction result,
return the result.
If I want to know what is
the size of my program,
the size is this amount about 1K
which includes the opcode of my
program or code of all the functions
that are used in my program.
This is called a static linking
and we already discussed.
What is this static linking and then this
is the way that happens in real time.
I mean any any a practical application.
But we already said that what the there is.
Another way to use a function
that is written by another person
which we call it dynamic linking.
Dynamic linking.
We already said that happens at runtime,
so at compile time nothing gonna
be merged to my program.
Everything happens at runtime. How?
Basically, if this is my program that
is going to use this library routine.
At first I simply run my program
with the help of the shell.
My program goes inside the memory at
some time when I call the function add.
From the library routines,
for instance says.
I asked the kernel to Buddhist wrap
at that function the output of that
function for me inside a memory.
And that part of the library
thing goes inside another space
available inside the memory.
But this is not part of the
OP code of my program.
This is in another space of them over.
And then the kernel tells me that your
library or your function is available
at this location of the memory and
you are allowed to use it and after
that my program gonna use that function.
Which is loaded by the kernel you see,
it happens at the runtime.
It's not part of my program.
I request the kernel to
bootstrap that function for me,
and then I can call that function.
And by the way,
you already said that this second
call is not a system call.
Why?
Because this is a library routine.
It's not part of the kernel.
The first call from the kennel was the
system called Taboo distracted Library.
But when the library is inside their
memory and we are going to use it,
this is not the system call anymore.
It's just a normal call.
So now we want to see how a dynamic
library is built and how we can
use a library dynamic library.
Building a dynamic library is exactly
the same as building a static library
with some 22 minor differences.
The first difference is that when
you are building your functions.
Into opcode you have to
add another option called.
This is an option called
position independent Code or PC.
Basically you have to say that dash,
FPC, meaning that you want to build
that function part of the library
as a position independent code.
So again, in terms of coding,
everything is the same.
The same function you write.
The only difference is that now
that you want to compile it,
you have to add this option.
So you compile the add dot C
with this option and you have
the object file of the app,
but this object file is position independent.
It means that it doesn't include
as part of any program.
It's going to be loaded by the kernel.
Again, for the second function
in the second file you compile
it with this option.
And it's such.
So at the end of the day,
you're gonna have objects.
Files of the functions.
But all of them has this feature.
Basically all of them are
position independent code.
And then you have to put
them in one archive file.
This time the way that you put
them together is different.
Now you have to ask the C compiler.
To put all these position independent
code object file into a single file.
But with this option of shared.
And build them.
So that's the difference.
In a static linking in the static library,
you put all the object file
off the functions by just
simply archiving them into one.
I mean compressed or zip
file with the extension.
But here you have to ask legacy
compiler not only to put them in a
single file but also build them again.
So C compiler build them again
into a single file with this
option of shared meaning that
now all these functions going
to be used as a dynamic linking.
By convention,
the Dynamic Library has the
extension as oh or shared object.
It basically is a collection of
position independent object files.
So that's the way that you can
build a dynamic library as a
collection of math functions.
Now the second step is that now that you can,
for instance, you generate this file.
And you put it on your website or you
give it to some other programmer or
you sell it to other programmers and
you ask them to use them or whatever.
Now,
the person that wants to use your
library is able to dynamically
link or use your functions.
In terms of the user.
Is everything is exactly the same? So.
Again, we have a header file including
the prototype of all the functions
included in the dynamic library.
Again, this is usually provided by the.
Producer of the Dynamic library.
And you have to simply
include the header file.
To your program.
As you can see here,
everything is same as static linking.
And then when you you have to
compile your code into object file.
And then you have to link your
code with the object file of
the function that you used.
But here is the main difference.
You tell the C compiler that this
is the object file of my program.
And the object file of the
functions that I'm using is
inside this shared library.
And then make it executable
file with the name main for me.
What happens is that when you compile it,
when you run this program,
it's going to be created a file for you.
But this file doesn't include the object
file of the functions that you used.
Basically.
It has a reference to the object files.
When you run this program,
you receive this error file.
Basically, it says that now that I'm
running this opcode in this file,
I cannot find the shared library.
So you see, it means that
the object file of the ad.
And the object file of the SAB is
not inside the main object file.
It is somewhere else,
and the kernel cannot find.
The file that includes the objects.
So in order to solve this,
either you have to put this file into a
standard location of the shared libraries,
or you can include your current directory.
As he a as a as a extra,
I mean location for the shared libraries.
This happens with this command.
So this is the system variable.
Which shows that which location
of the Unix operating system
includes all the shared libraries.
Either you copy your shared library.
Into that location.
Or I did this way I simply added
my current directory to that.
Directory,
so basically I add a new
location to that path.
And then I update that system variable.
And now when you call your program a,
it's going to be successfully run.
Again, you see here.
In terms of running the program,
everything is the same.
Nobody can tell that this
program is dynamically called.
The add or subtraction or statically,
but we know that the way we build the.
Main objects and the way we give
the static or dynamic library.
We know that the difference.
Another way to see the difference is this.
Now if you see what is the size of
the executable file for the main.
So this question is from you.
You think that? The text amounts of the
opcode amounts of this main file is.
Greater or lower than the previous one.
This main file includes main
object of course only or.
Not only did that one,
but also includes the opcode
of the add or subtraction.
So what's the answer?
Exactly as Vivian said.
And also Danielle.
Basically, we said that in the
dynamic linking the op code of
the function that we use is not
inside the program files of us.
Basically it doesn't include
the object file of the functions
because we dynamically call them.
So at the time without running the program,
it only includes the upload of our programs.
Folded size gonna be less
than the static linking.
So, but why I put a question mark here?
If you do all these steps and
you checked it text size,
text segment, size of them and you
see that it's greater than that a.
And there is another reason for that,
but for this course you can
assume that this answer is right.
So you have to assume that this
is less than this static linking,
and it only includes the opcode,
but definitely doesn't include the
op code of the function that we use.
We already said that that was
the question in the midterm exam.
Actually, what is the difference of the
static and dynamic in terms of the speed?
Static is better,
but it wastes a lot of memory,
so the positive negative in
terms of the dynamic.
It less uses less memory.
But the speed is lower because at
runtime it makes every system call to
the kernel to load the function for you,
and then you can use it.
So at runtime it takes time for the
kernel to load your functions and attach.
So why I explained this static library
and dynamic library first of all,
now you know that how to how these
library routines is delivered to you?
For instance, when you use the STD IO.
That edge this library is a static
library or dynamic library.
Now you can know and you can
investigate whether this video
is a static or dynamic library,
and then you know that when you
use the printf in your code.
Your code has the opcode of
the print ad inside.
When you use it as a static,
or if you use it dynamically,
it's not there.
You are using in the runtime and now
you can manage whether you run your
program faster or memory efficient.
But the idea?
I mean,
the main idea that I explained
this here this that this topic
of dynamic or static is this.
Whether the library that
you are using is a static.
4 dynamic when your program is done.
The library is out of memory.
So in terms of aesthetic.
When your program is done,
your process is done.
It's going to be out of memory,
so this is going to be out of the memory.
The library that used is
going to be out of the memory.
In terms of the dynamic,
although you ask the kernel to
bootstrap the library for you,
but when you are done with this.
Then is going to be out of the
memory and then your process going
to be finished and everything
is out of the memory.
So the function is not inside
the memory anymore.
Whether it's a static or dynamic.
But the question is this,
is it possible to demonize a library?
Meaning that is it possible to keep
the library inside the memory,
then the dynamic linking gonna
be very fast because it's
already there inside the memory.
So. In terms of the minimizing a
static library, the answer is no.
And the reason is. Because this
inside the opcode of your program.
So when your program or process is finished.
It is outside the memory.
So if you demonize disease,
you have to demonize the whole process.
So just for one function of the library,
you have to keep all the
processes inside the memory.
This is one problem.
Another problem is that you have to give
access to all other processes to just
only access this part of your program.
So this is not a good way,
so it's static links of the libraries
is not a good way to be demonized.
In terms of the dynamic dancers,
yes why, because when your process
asked the kernel to bootstrap
the library inside the memory.
And then when you're.
Process is done.
The kernel can remove your
process outside of memory,
but they cannot keeps keeps the
keep the library inside the memory.
And then other processes can use
the same function a the same library
which is already inside the memory.
So we can't demonize a
static dynamic library. So.
A demon eyes or a demon dynamic
library is called shared library.
That's why in the Unix platform
we have the extension SO shared.
Objects, meaning that these functions
becomes an object code or opcode.
And they can't be demonized,
and they can stay inside the memory
and be caught by not only the
one process but other processes.
So. Now that we have shared libraries by
the idea of demonising a dynamic library.
The question is that.
The sharing scope is inside one computer.
Meaning that. It's back to this.
We are inside a single computer and we
have a demonized library inside a memory.
All the processors inside this
computer can call this. Library.
But is it possible to have
a globally shared library?
Meaning that. All around the world.
All the processes inside all our computers.
Use a single shared library in a
single computer. That's the question.
So some of you asked me that what type
of question gonna be in the final exam?
This is one type of question.
We know that what is the shared library?
We know that what is a dynamic library?
Now my question from you is that is
it possible to make a shared library
available for all other processes?
All around the world.
You already know network IPC.
You already know a. Dynamic library.
I already know they shared the
topic of a shared library.
What would be your answer?
Victor says yes. Michelle
says yes. How about others?
So we have 23 year students. So.
Oh basically, Michelle says that
we can put the shared library
into a distribution and all the
programmers can buy our program
to have the shared library.
But I'm saying that no,
no without buying your shared library.
So I'm saying that, for instance.
Let me explain it better.
So for instance, I buy a computer.
Hey. I asked the kernel of
the computer A to Buddhist,
wrap the function a add.
Sorry the function add oh inside the memory.
And then I have another computer P.
For instance, in Canada.
Another computer,
see for instance in UK.
And there is a process here
and there is a process here.
Is it possible for a process in a
computer in Canada to use the function?
The library ad. Which is.
Inside the memory of computer A.
How about C?
Is it possible for the process C?
To use the shared library,
add inside the computer and assume
that this is computer in in the US.
Meysam says that yes,
through socket programming.
Good idea, Victor says that it
would still have to be hosted by
server somewhere that anyone who
wanted the library could access.
Yes correct, you see here.
Uh, you are coming with the design,
so that's the problem and now you
are going to design a way to make a
shared library not only shared between
the process inside a single computer,
but also it is shared between
all the other computers.
Correct, basically the idea is that you can.
Created this server.
That uses a shared library.
So you already have the program for
this server. Assume that this process.
So this is the computer a inside. In a U.
S. In US. And this is the kernel.
And this is the. Program of the server.
If this server are program program that
we wrote for the TCP connection. Uses.
The math library as a shared library.
For instance, this server can use the ad.
Inside the shared library.
Now if I have a client.
For instance, be in Canada.
This client can ask the server.
To add two numbers X&Y.
And this server is using the.
Shared library for addition
and does the addition and then
return the result to the client.
I have another client C inside,
for instance UK. This client calls
this time the server to do subtraction.
And the server dynamically calls the.
Object of the subtraction does the
subtraction and returns the result
through the client inside the UK.
This way. This server the
program has called, we call it.
The server is acting as a mediator for
the shared library inside the computer.
You see the design.
And then. Basically the server is able to
charge you for doing your calculation.
When says it may ask you $2 for addition,
it may ask you $1 for subtraction.
That's the way that you can
make money as a programmer.
You can write a function that does
a sophisticated math operation,
and then whoever wants to use that function.
Either that person should write the
function which is time consuming,
or they can use your function.
As a shared library through a server
by the TCP network communication.
And that's the idea of web services.
Web services are the services
available on the Internet.
And you can.
As a client,
you can call these services and these
services has an access to some shared
library inside their computers and
they provide the computation for you.
Sometimes they are free, sometimes they are.
Ask for some money.
One of the famous web services are for
Amazon AWS, Amazon Web Services that.
Not only it can does a lot of math
operations for you, it can does.
It can do a lot of, I mean.
Other tasks for you.
For instance AI task for you
machine learning task for you.
I don't know whatever.
Or sometimes, for instance, you can ask.
Google has also web services you can
ask that what is the coordination of.
For instance, X is 5,
Y is Frances tab in the world,
and it can try to find the location
of that for the longitude,
latitude and etc.
So that's the idea that the design
behind the web services and now you
have cloud services, meaning that.
Not only shared libraries as a function,
but also you can ask for a
machine virtual machine.
And another computer.
So all are based on the same idea of
shared library available through.
A network IPC. And that was it.
I hope you like this idea or this design.
And also that was at one example
of the question in the final.
So you see here how we can come
up with a new ideas and how
people actually how the advanced
programmers use the same design
for advanced type of program.
OK, so we have a question from Victor.
It's not the exact same concept.
By there are satellite rendering services
that have really powerful setups that can
process graphic information for a fee
like branding and animation. Absolutely.
I mean that was a simple design,
but as you can see in high level
there are this doing the same.
But you're right.
I mean, there are very details involved.
I mean, if you want to do some
sophisticated calculation by asking
some web services for you to do for you.
You're right,
there are some details involved,
but they are all based on this same design.
OK, so for instance,
one of the instances that.
Uh, assume that you write a, uh?
Uh, I mean matrix multiplication.
That is based on the very good design,
meaning that it can does.
It can do a.
LA creates a lot of children and
doesn't calculation very fast.
Then you can wrap it as a dynamic library.
And then you can wrap it as a,
uh, this server.
You can write a server program that calls
this library to do the matrix multiplication,
and then you can release the IP port
address of your server program to others.
And then they can call your server
to do the math multiplication.
This is one way.
Or you can put the uh,
in this way you can you have to just
release the IP port address of your program.
Or you can just Simply put your
dynamic library as a Download
file inside your website and
everybody can download your library.
But again,
they have to download it and then put it
in their computer to use your library.
This way the web service or I mean
this server idea is basically you
don't have to ask them to download
your library inside their computer,
they just have to make a connection
with your computer with your program.
That's the difference.
So these are maybe some questions.
The final. What's the benefit of?
Making a shared library available
through TCP network protocol
or just simply ask the user to
download your life dynamic library.
What's the benefit? What's the disadvantage?
OK, I'm done and I'm
ready for your questions.
Victor says that I was curious,
what's the benefit of compiling the
archive as a set of object files?
Opposed to see or ask files is it is
speed benefit because all of the code
has already been compiled into opcodes.
Or RO files. The only time they
accept or both. Oh, basically,
uh, that was the topic of the.
In one of our labs in the lab it was also.
In the lab of three.
In the lab, free.
We said that the C compiler.
I mean, originally we have to do these steps.
See for instance our program.
Which is in the C program and then we have
to use this option, meaning that it it.
Uh, sorry, escop option. Basically it.
Trans it translate our sea lines
of code to assembly lines of code.
And then, uh,
so basically it creates define main dot S.
And then we have to again ask the C compiler.
To translate the assembly line.
So OP code and the result gonna be.
The main. Dot O.
And then we have to ask the C compiler
to build the executable file for us.
So we have to say that main oh.
Dash or meaning that we need the
executable file object file and
we can pick a name for that may.
I just wanted to clear discord.
So these are the main steps
that we have to do, however.
We said that the C compiler you
can do all these three steps,
so step one, step two and Step 3.
We can say that in one step we can do that.
We can say that CC.
Main Dot C dash. Oh and then may.
Basically it does all these
three steps in one step.
So it simply creates the
main executable file for us.
But it doesn't create the object file for us,
and it doesn't create
the assembly code for us.
So in order to answer your question.
For the static.
Or dynamic library we we need the OR files.
So we need the.
Object files,
that's why we have to do the
compile with this option in
order to have the object files.
And then make them one single file.
So that's why for the static or
dynamic library, we need that.
Pull it back to the steps.
Let's go back to the.
Feeling a static library,
we have to do this study.
We should not go directly to the
building the executable file because
we need the object files and then
we have to put the object files
into a single file in the static.
In the dynamic also the same.
So let's meet back here.
In the dynamic again you have to do compile.
Of course, with this option,
so we need the object files.
But again,
we don't need the assembly line,
so we can simply omit the assembly step.
Yeah.
Because we have to put these
object files into a single
file in the dynamic version,
we have to put it inside.
This file using the compiler
with the option shared in this
static using the command AR.
And at the time of the using also
there's a difference when you are
using the static library. Sorry.
By using the static library.
At the time of, uh?
Using when you compile your program,
you have to compile it into opcodes first.
And then at the next step you have to
tell that this is the opcode of my file,
and this is the collection
of opcodes of the functions.
So again, in this step you
cannot directly goes to the.
Or file without mentioning the.
Collection of object files.
Yeah. Basically you have to
follow these steps, I mean.
For the static or dynamic.
Okie dokie so.
I'm going to be in the office and.
By the way, have a great day and a.
Hopefully we can see
each other next semester.
Also, I I wish you I mean.
Good luck with your final exam.
And I will be available
during the final exam two,
although it is with 7:00
PM up until 10:00 PM.
I think I'll be available
for your questions and etc.
And right after this class also
I'll be in the office hour.
For your questions.
You too Victor had a great day.
You too, Daniella,
Danielle, have a great day.
I'm glad I'm glad that you learned a lot.
You too may Sam have a great day?
I just have to stop because.